README.md, before:

# cmk-dev-site

_Easy Install Checkmk_

Scripts to install bleeding edge Checkmk in development context.

**If you are a regular Checkmk customer you probably don't want to use this,
as this tools remove sites without warning.**

## Installation

```
sudo apt install pipx
pipx ensurepath
# check output of this command. you might have to open a fresh terminal!
pipx install cmk-dev-site
```

For updating you can use:
```
pipx upgrade cmk-dev-site
```

## Usage

```
cmk-dev-install-site 2.5 # download package, install, create site for 2.5

# Download and install latest available daily build of 2.5.0
cmk-dev-install 2.5 && cmk-dev-site
# (will fall back to the daily builds of yesterday)

# Download daily build of today and
# setup distributed monitoring with one two sites:
cmk-dev-install 2.5.0-daily && cmk-dev-site -d 1

# Download and install raw edition package
cmk-dev-install --edition=cre 2.5.0-daily
```
### `cmk-dev-install-site`

Is a shortcut for the more verbose `cmk-dev-install` and `cmk-dev-site`
commands. This way you lose some of the possibilities, but only have to
remember one command. Also prints out the commands that it will execute, so you
can c&p it.

### `cmk-dev-install`

Will download the requested package of Checkmk and install said package.

You might request a daily build (`cmk-dev-install 2.5.0-daily`),
the latest available daily build (handy if there are no daily builds of today) (`cmk-dev-install 2.5`),
or an officially release Checkmk version (`cmk-dev-install 2.4.0p9`).

Please check the built in help (`cmk-dev-install --help`) for all options!

### `cmk-dev-site`

Will create a site, install the checkmk agent, and add a single host to the site.

`cmk-dev-site` uses [omd
commands](https://docs.checkmk.com/latest/en/omd_basics.html) and the official
[REST-API](https://docs.checkmk.com/latest/en/rest_api.html) to create one or
multiple sites based on the current default omd version (or the version
specified on the command line).

You might use `-d 1` to create a distributed monitoring with one distributed site.

Please check the built in help (`cmk-dev-site --help`) for all options!

### Cleanup

Currently there is no public available tool to completely cleanup sites and
packages create with the presented tools. If you are a Checkmk developer you
might make use of the internal tool `omd-hauweg`, otherwise you have to
manually remove the sites using `omd rm`.
For uninstall packages that are no longer in use you can use `omd cleanup`,
or you might fall back to use `apt purge`.

## Contributing

If you'd like to make contributions to the tool, check out our
[development documentation](https://github.com/Checkmk/cmk-dev-site/blob/main/DEVELOPMENT.md).
Here you'll see steps on how to setup your environment for local development.

Commit message:

Add cmk-dev-relay command to setup a relay
Added `cmk-dev-relay` command to deploy and manage Checkmk relay pods for testing using podman.
The tool creates two types of relay environments: an isolated SNMP relay with a single test host, and a standard host relay for agent-based monitoring.
Supports building relay images locally or pulling from DockerHub to match the installed Checkmk version.
Includes automatic site detection from environment variables, `.site` files, or running OMD sites.
Provides subcommands for lifecycle management: `up`, `down`, `restart`, `ps`, `logs`, and `kill` to control relay pods and configurations.

Change-Id: Ic002620177db690cca37e0c677f1a3d896e393f8

README.md, after:

# cmk-dev-site

_Easy Install Checkmk_

Scripts to install bleeding edge Checkmk in development context.

**If you are a regular Checkmk customer you probably don't want to use this,
as this tools remove sites without warning.**

## Installation

```
sudo apt install pipx
pipx ensurepath
# check output of this command. you might have to open a fresh terminal!
pipx install cmk-dev-site
```

For updating you can use:
```
pipx upgrade cmk-dev-site
```

## Usage

```
cmk-dev-install-site 2.5 # download package, install, create site for 2.5

# Download and install latest available daily build of 2.5.0
cmk-dev-install 2.5 && cmk-dev-site
# (will fall back to the daily builds of yesterday)

# Download daily build of today and
# setup distributed monitoring with one two sites:
cmk-dev-install 2.5.0-daily && cmk-dev-site -d 1

# Download and install raw edition package
cmk-dev-install --edition=cre 2.5.0-daily
```
### `cmk-dev-install-site`

Is a shortcut for the more verbose `cmk-dev-install` and `cmk-dev-site`
commands. This way you lose some of the possibilities, but only have to
remember one command. Also prints out the commands that it will execute, so you
can c&p it.

### `cmk-dev-install`

Will download the requested package of Checkmk and install said package.

You might request a daily build (`cmk-dev-install 2.5.0-daily`),
the latest available daily build (handy if there are no daily builds of today) (`cmk-dev-install 2.5`),
or an officially release Checkmk version (`cmk-dev-install 2.4.0p9`).

Please check the built in help (`cmk-dev-install --help`) for all options!

### `cmk-dev-site`

Will create a site, install the checkmk agent, and add a single host to the site.

`cmk-dev-site` uses [omd
commands](https://docs.checkmk.com/latest/en/omd_basics.html) and the official
[REST-API](https://docs.checkmk.com/latest/en/rest_api.html) to create one or
multiple sites based on the current default omd version (or the version
specified on the command line).

You might use `-d 1` to create a distributed monitoring with one distributed site.

Please check the built in help (`cmk-dev-site --help`) for all options!

### Cleanup

Currently there is no public available tool to completely cleanup sites and
packages create with the presented tools. If you are a Checkmk developer you
might make use of the internal tool `omd-hauweg`, otherwise you have to
manually remove the sites using `omd rm`.
For uninstall packages that are no longer in use you can use `omd cleanup`,
or you might fall back to use `apt purge`.

### `cmk-dev-relay`

Manages Checkmk relay containers for testing using docker-compose. This tool
deploys relay services in isolated container environments:
- **SNMP relay**: Includes a relay container and SNMP daemon for testing
- **Host relay**: Uses host network mode for direct connectivity

**Note**: This tool supports both Docker and Podman via their respective compose
implementations:
- `docker compose` (Docker with built-in compose plugin)
- `podman compose` (Podman 4.0+ with built-in compose support)
- `podman-compose` (Separate podman-compose tool)
- `docker-compose` (Legacy standalone docker-compose)

The tool automatically detects which compose implementation is available.

## Contributing

If you'd like to make contributions to the tool, check out our
[development documentation](https://github.com/Checkmk/cmk-dev-site/blob/main/DEVELOPMENT.md).
Here you'll see steps on how to setup your environment for local development.
